---
updated_at: 2026-02-16T00:54:29.050+10:00
---
# Procedure

The Imperial Interstellar Scout Service is responsible for maintaining star charts and information on stellar systems for all of Charted Space and many places beyond. Much of this work requires travel to these star systems and detailed surveys by personnel and machines in the system itself. Details on stellar-class objects, however, are data the IISS can gather remotely. 

The survey branch, or Imperial Grand Survey, is responsible for creating and maintaining this information. In most cases, stellar-level data is evident from potentially hundreds of parsecs distance. Long observation from multiple locations within the Third Imperium have determined the coordinates of most stars within 3,000 parsecs of the Imperial borders and of many stars across the entire span of the galaxy and its surrounding satellite galaxies. The presence of non-stellar objects is much less complete. Brown dwarfs are likely more plentiful than stars but as they age they emit less heat, becoming undisguisable from large gas giants except in terms of gravitational influence. Most white dwarfs, young pulsars and neutron stars are visible, sometimes across even vaster distances, as are black holes that are feeding off accretion disks. However, a quiescent black hole or aging neutron star, while more massive than most stars, is only visible if it has a direct gravitational effect on another body or passes in front of a luminous source, creating a temporary gravitational lens effect. The former method of identification is accurate over vast differences, the latter, while visible at perhaps even further distances, provides only a single data point and at best a provisional one-time marking on an external mapping branch chart. 

The Scout Service categorises surveys in five Classes, from Class I to Class V. Remote observation from established scout bases and reference to thousands of years of charts provides something else, a Class 0 survey by professional astronomers within the survey branch who never travel aboard starships except as passengers when transferring between posts or attending conferences on other worlds. Class 0 data gathered by remote observation from distances beyond 30 parsecs corresponds to a Survey Index (SI) of 3. 

The initial survey within a star system is a Class II survey. Both the exploration and survey branches of the IISS perform Class II surveys, with the exploration branch generally limiting their surveys to ‘potentially interesting’ systems far beyond borders of the Third Imperium, and the survey branch filling in the gaps, moving outward to cover every ‘mundane’ system. In reality, many ‘potentially interesting’ systems turn out to be rather mundane and some assumed mundane systems are actually very interesting. Class II surveys are sometimes conducted ad hoc, during a refuelling operation enroute to visit a system thought to be more interesting.

Class II survey information is recorded in RSC databases using a partial Class III data format. As much of the data is incomplete and preliminary, it is not available to the RPSC until the completion of a Class III survey.

One basic objective of the Scout Service is to ensure that any system within or near the Imperial border is subject to at least a Class III survey, detailing all of the system’s significant bodies, identifying and providing a basic classification of life-bearing worlds and noting any large-scale features or anomalies. 

While exploration office teams may conduct a Class II survey of some intermediary system on their way to a targeted objective system, survey office teams rarely stop at a Class II survey at a targeted system. If an internal or external mapping team embarks into a system, a Class III survey with a completed report is normally the minimum effort of an expedition.

A statutory, but often partially unfulfilled, objective of the IISS is to verify the data in a Class III survey every 20 years within the Imperium and every century in regions within 40 parsecs beyond its borders. Staffing, prioritisation and diplomatic issues may curtail these ongoing efforts. Systems rarely change significantly during intervals between Class III surveys and the main justification for the repetitive surveys – other than the budget of the internal and external mapping branches – is for this effort to act as a tripwire to detect non-physical changes in the systems, such as the arrival of new settlers or the establishment of outposts and commercial stations at different locations within a system. This detection can result in a thorough follow-up investigation.

The detailing of a world’s social attributes requires more effort and different skills than those necessary to determine its physical characteristics. For most worlds, the procedures to gather this data are part of a Class IV survey. The Second Survey performed full Class IV surveys on all Imperial and many neighbouring systems. A survey team gathers their data into a Class IV Part C data set, sometimes called the census data set but the teams and methodologies for gathering this data vary according to three different operational procedures. These three specific procedures are for surveys of member worlds of the Third Imperium, surveys of contacted worlds outside Imperial borders and surveys of uncontacted worlds.

### INTERNAL BRANCH SURVEYS 
The survey office’s internal mapping branch is responsible for surveys of worlds within the Third Imperium. Performing a social survey or a census of an Imperial world is theoretically straightforward. The Scout Service has clear authority to conduct the survey and the world is obligated to provide the required information. However, the IISS cannot simply gather a set of data from the local authorities and move onto the next system. There are a number of reasons for this: the data may be of poor quality, out-of-date, too low a Tech Level to be easily usable (a TL1 world may have records on scrolls or stone tablets) and it may be intentionally misleading. 

To ensure the census data is accurate, the survey team has access to local Imperial authorities such as nobles and starport authority personnel, as well as any detached duty scouts residing on or visiting the world. Even properly formatted up-to-date data is checked by random sampling, interviews and orbital scans. If the data is found to be statistically accurate, that helps with demographic information but does not necessarily establish more subtle cultural information. The Scout Service relies on observation, questionnaires and scoring procedures to determine such things as cultural diversity, progressiveness and militancy. 

A potential complication specific to internal surveys is the appeals process. After gathering and analysing the census data, the operational team presents it to both the Scout Service Operations Office and to the local government. If the local government finds the data ‘objectionable’, it can, and often will, appeal the findings through their noble representative and ask for an arbitration by the nobility. These appeals are rarely successful on more concrete factors such as population and GWP statistics but on subtler cultural descriptions, the local nobility sometimes asks the Scout Service to temper some ‘objectionable’ findings of more qualitative measurements. The introduction of the development score during the Second Survey resulted in many appeals but the simplicity of the measure and its tie back to statistically valid efficiency factors from a database of more than 11,000 systems made most of these appeals doomed to failure. 

The Second Survey ensured census data was statistically correct as of the time period 995–1065, but that in itself was a 70 year span. More concrete data such as population and GWP is regularly updated but the cultural data for many systems even within the Imperium has not been verified since the Second Survey teams departed the system. 

### EXTERNAL BRANCH SURVEYS 
Systems near the Imperial borders that have already been contacted and are aware of interstellar society are surveyed by the survey office’s external mapping branch. The level of contact varies from Imperial client states with strong ties to the Third Imperium to systems that have not been officially contacted by the Imperium in centuries. Such distant systems may have regular contact with Imperial citizens – traders, explorers, adventurers, renegades – but the further from the Imperial border and the less significant the system, the less likely the Imperium is to maintain any sort of diplomatic contact. Still, all of the worlds under external mapping branch purview are at least aware that the Third Imperium exists, although they may have little idea of its actual scope and powers.

The job of an external mapping branch census gatherer is theoretically more difficult than that of those who conduct surveys inside the Imperium but the procedures employed are actually more standardised. No data is trusted, so it is more a process of determining the data from direct observation. Statistical sampling methods can determine population and economic output. Outreach teams conduct direct and indirect observation of the local culture and derive information from conditions on the ground. When the local population is friendly, this is generally straightforward but scout teams are careful to look past the view of the world as orchestrated by ‘handlers’ or local officials. If a world’s authorities or population are overtly hostile to the census team, direct contact is limited and the accuracy of the information gathered is ‘best effort’ backed up by statistical models derived from thousands of systems and years of cultural data. If detached duty scouts are in system or have visited recently, their experiences are mined for information. The census team also interviews other Imperial citizens or friendly outsiders to corroborate or correct data gathered by indirect means. 

One advantage of an external survey is that it is not subject to appeal. While a client state might attempt to influence findings through diplomatic or economic means, such attempts rarely gain traction and at best allow the objecting system to host and attempt to influence a second scout team usually backed by an Imperial diplomatic representative. Worlds far from the Imperium in distance and influence may never even see the results of the survey, much less contest the data. 

### CONTACT AND LIAISON BRANCH SURVEYS 
Contact procedures for a new sophont species are the same as those for an existing sophont species that has been long isolated, whether a minor human subspecies or lost colony. It is a cautious process carried out by the exploration office’s contact and liaison branch. As the Imperium grew, it absorbed most regions isolated by the Long Night. The exploration cruiser expeditions sent far beyond Imperial borders were common in the first few centuries of the exploration office’s existence but became infrequent after the civil war. New first contact situations became uncommon and when the Second Survey began, the major focus of the contact and liaison branch had shifted to internal relations between the various species and cultures inside the Imperium. Still, a cadre of dedicated first contact teams operate far beyond Imperial borders and in unexplored rifts and backwaters, making first contact with people who have never heard of the Third Imperium and might not even know they live on a sphere and not on the back of a cosmic turtle. 

Whenever possible, first contact begins with covert operations. If the inhabitants of a newly explored system are not spacefaring, this is simply a matter of remaining in space at far orbit and observing. A civilisation of TL5 and below has little capability to detect a ship in distant orbit, much less to react with effective hostility. If the uncontacted natives have space travel observation is even more careful, with detection and tracking of local system traffic a priority for active concealment and avoidance procedures. 

If the natives are advanced enough to broadcast radio or television signals, the contact team can attempt to learn the local language and some customs through remote reconnaissance. Lower Tech Level worlds require landings in remote regions and surreptitious recon operations on the ground to gather data. The team leaders use this data to determine if an attempt at first contact is warranted or safe, both for the contact team and the local civilisation. For a strictly survey operation, especially on a world of TL5 or less, contact is not usually recommended. For more advanced locals, the team must gauge the level of hostility and probable reaction to first contact. 

In the early days of the Imperium, the emphasis was on making this first contact, introducing the Imperium to the locals and making a case for Imperial membership. This emphasis had ended by the time of the civil war. By the seventh century, the Imperium was no longer expanding. Contacts with other cultures still occurred, especially where political consideration favoured gaining friendly local allies. However such contact decisions usually occurred after a Class IV covert survey report arrived on an Imperial administrator’s desk and a contact mission received approval. 

The initial scout contact team retains great latitude in making decisions far from Imperial borders and may proceed with contact after deliberation but as they are far from Imperial support, they must weigh the benefits and risks of their actions. If the local natives have had any known previous interstellar contacts that had good outcomes, the team is likely to recommend proceeding with contact. If known previous contacts ended in hostilities, the team is likely to report back to base without establishing contact and to return only if adequately supported. 

# Detailed Description
## CLASS 0 SURVEY 
Class 0 Surveys, also called ‘armchair surveys’ are conducted at great distance, using arrays of telescopes and referencing historical star charts, some nearly 10,000 years old. At the world of Reference (Core 0140) the IISS maintains a ‘golden copy’ of verified stellar records for 80% of the stars in the galaxy and 60% of the stars in 80% of the globular clusters and satellite galaxies surrounding it. More than 10% of the stars in the Andromeda galaxy and other members of the Local Group are compiled in these records. Updates can take years to arrive, and errors can take centuries to correct, but records exist for nearly every star system in Charted Space and within 3,000 parsecs of Reference. This database is available to all active duty and recalled scout personnel, although some information is redacted for unspecified reasons. This database is referred to as the Reference Star Chart or RSC. 

A general public version of this database is freely available from every scout base and contains information for all Charted Space sectors within four sectors or 160 parsecs of Reference and many regions up to 200 parsecs distant. This database has a considerably greater number of redactions, often excluding even basic information on Red Zone systems. This public version is called the Reference Public Star Chart or RPSC. The RPSC has an official date stamp of 360-1068, after the date of a complete data validating and reformatting effort following the Second Survey. Updates are published annually but these provide only incremental data on a small fraction of surveyed systems. 

The RSC includes many distant systems never visited by the IISS or its predecessors but some of these systems still have partial information related to some planetary-sized bodies. These include some gas giants and many smaller bodies discovered by remote techniques. As this information is sparse, spotty and unverified, it is not generally included as part of the Class 0 Survey information. The end result of a Class 0 survey data review is an increase of the SI of a system to 4. Some records in the RSC include only SI 1, 2, or 3 data for distant unvisited stars. The format for Class 0 and Class I surveys, complete or incomplete, is identical and has not changed since the end of the First Survey. 

For very distant systems, especially when precise stellar orbits are unknown, records are often kept in a tabular Class 0 survey form covering an entire sector or subsector. These forms are not widely distributed but are usually not restricted and may be available to reputable inquirers on request. These forms contain a single line for each system allowing for up to eight stars with fields for general location of primary, secondary and companions, usually filled in with stellar Type, Subtype and Class and any detected gas giants or other remarks. 

## CLASS I SURVEY 
Determining the orbital characteristics of stars and planetary objects requires a closer survey. A Class I survey can be conducted by a massive observatoryequipped scout survey cruiser from within 30 parsecs or by a smaller Armstrong- or Donosev-class survey vessel from one or two parsecs distant. These surveys will detect any substellar objects down to the mass of large gas giants and require only 2D hours to conduct with the Science skill specialities of astronomy, physics and/or planetology. The end result of a Class I survey scan is an increase of the SI of a system to 5, which confirms some partial information about a system’s large to medium gas giants and probable orbital planes. 

Only systems with complete and verified Class I survey data are included in the RPSC. All records in the RPSC have at least a completed Class 0/I survey form. This is a SI 4 record allowing for an arbitrary number of stellarlike objects with a comments field for each which may include additional information.

## CLASS II SURVEY 
After jumping into a system, a Class II survey establishes the location of all planetary-sized bodies, major planetoid belts and moons of significant size. The surveyors note other ‘interesting’ phenomena, such as obvious signs of civilisation – radio transmissions, artificial lights on the dark side of a world or actual spacecraft within the system. The survey does not detail planets other than to determine Size, and sometimes Atmosphere, but scans will indicate the obvious presence of abundant life by detecting certain combinations of atmospheric gases or clear biological spectra anomalies from surface vegetation. 

A Class II survey requires 2D days to conduct. It does not generally involve the deployment of probes, except for triangulation purposes and to detect worlds blocked by large bodies such as stars or parent planets. Landing parties are never deployed and contact with any local sophonts is not attempted. The only physical contact with a world might be for refuelling at a gas giant, waterworld or icy body. 

At the end of the survey, the SI of the system is 6, providing a reasonably accurate estimate of the orbits and Sizes of all planets, planetoid belts and significant moons. Detailed information is rarely gathered, except by serendipitous proximity, although the survey does do a more thorough scan of the habitable zone(s) of a system and rough information about atmosphere and hydrographics codes of worlds in that region are noted for future verification. Any detection of local sophont inhabitants is also usually serendipitous and distant. It is noted for future reference and even if the natives are piloting spacecraft in the vicinity of the scout craft, any contact and potential detection of the scout vessel and probes by the locals is actively avoided. 

Class II surveys are preliminary and usually followed-up by a Class III survey of the entire system. The Class II survey does not have a unique format but uses a Class II/III Survey data format with a flag marking the data as provisional and incomplete. 

‘Sub’ is an abbreviation for subordinate bodies – in this case significant moons but it may also include dwarf planets within planetoid belts. These will be developed in later chapters. The notes field can include any relevant profile information or miscellaneous remarks.

## CLASS III SURVEY 
The purpose of a Class III survey is to accurately record the physical characteristics of all the significant bodies within a system. This involves the deployment of probes to at least fly by the system’s planets and significant moons. On worlds of particular interest, such as those within the habitable zone or with evidence of native life, landing teams are often deployed to conduct sample gathering and assess environmental conditions, although this may be limited to probe landings and analysis instead if resource limitations or hazards make landings unpractical. A Class III survey makes no effort to establish contact with sophont native residents but if local populations belong to a contacted culture, communications are not prohibited and may occur at the discretion of the scout team leaders. 

The time required for completing a Class III survey is usually about 10 weeks. Some of this period involves flight time between various worlds. If the system is fairly compact, a Class III survey could take as little as 30 days but if it consists of widely separate worlds or subsidiary stars in far orbits, short-range jumps might be used to complete the survey and its duration may exceed 100 days. 

At the end of the survey, the SI of the system is 8, providing a reasonably accurate estimate of the Size, Atmosphere and Hydrographics of all planets and significant moons. Habitable zone worlds often receive the most attention but no attempt is made to do a detailed study of a world’s physical or xenological characteristics. Other information, such as a detection of the presence of inhabitants, the identification of ruins, interesting lifeforms or natural phenomena is flagged for detailed investigation by a targeted survey team. 

An outcome of a completed Class III survey is a filled out and verified Class III survey form. In most cases this data is then released in the RPSC database and freely available to all Imperial-registered starships. The scout team usually begins work on a Class IV Planetary Profile Form for interesting worlds or the recognised mainworld but the data is tagged as preliminary, for internal use only, and not released into the RPSC database. 

## CLASS IV SURVEY 
### Part P Form
For worlds with no known population, a targeted physical-only Class IV survey of a world might be undertaken as an adjunct to a Class III survey of a system. This survey is often referred to as a Class IV Part P or Class IV-P world survey. While a full Class IV survey may require more than half a year to complete, a physical survey of even a complex life-bearing world usually requires no more than 30 days. This survey almost always includes at least one landing but standard procedures call for at least three sample-gathering expeditions to separate locations on the world’s surface. Usually these are conducted by the crew but in some instances such as on worlds with highly corrosive atmospheres, the surveyors will only conduct one-way probe missions and gather nothing more than data and images from the surface with no expectation of probe recovery. 

Most Class IV-P surveys are investigations of unexplored worlds beyond the Imperial border. The Scout Service does not consider these deep targeted surveys as necessary for confirmation of details of previously explored worlds, although this level of study was conducted on many worlds, inhabited and otherwise, during both grand surveys. Both the exploration branch and the external mapping branch conduct these surveys, with the exploration branch normally targeting ‘interesting’ worlds for initial examination and flagging ‘notable’ worlds for the survey office to follow up on during a subsequent expedition.

### Part C Form 
The standard display form for a Class IV social or census survey assumes the completion of a physical survey and may or may not display the header information related to the Part P form. Some balkanised worlds may have a worldwide Part C, followed by separate Part C forms for each faction or government. Rather than completing a full Class IV Part C form for a balkanised world’s factions or nations, a shorter profile based listing, the Census Subunit Profile Form (CSPF), is often provided to summarise these subunits of a world. Often this is the only public information available in the RPSC for anything less than an entire world’s data:
